How has the community been reacting to
your research? It seems like it kind of
flies in the face of everything that
we've been told, which is that the only
possible intervention is, you know,
progressively harsher and harsher
chemotherapeutic agents.
>> Yeah. You know, it's um depends on who
you ask. Uh it's not universal in the
response to our stuff. Um if you ask
oncologists
uh who take care of folks every day um
they say it's all nonsense because they
never heard about it.
Is if you ask scientists
uh they say yeah well we know
mitochondria have problems but we still
think it's a genetic disease otherwise I
won't get my grant from the National
Institutes of Health. Um, when you talk
to folks, they seem to want to know more
uh about this. Uh, I haven't spoken to
people in the uh u pharmaceutical
industry. I may I don't know what they
think. Um, they more or less do whatever
the boss tells them to do. Um, I find
that's mostly what happens. Um my my
colleagues
uh think uh they're they they're um
uh they're they're they're locked into
conf confirmation bias and I and I think
a lot of folks are that that you can't
buck a system that's been in place for
so many decades even if you have
accurate science. So I don't know how
you respond to that. um you know it
can't be right because everybody else
thinks differently.
So I don't think anybody
wants to have the apple cart turned
over. I I think everybody wants to keep
the status quo. Uh regardless of of what
of what field or occupation or
discipline you're in. I think the people
of course would like something
different. I was going to say like
except for the people with brain cancer,
they probably would like
>> Well, not only not only brain cancer,
all cancers. I I get hundreds of emails
and from everybody, every type of a
cancer um and and and uh they all want
metabolic therapy. Um but the
institution, the system is not allowing
it for a variety of reasons and none of
it has to do with patient health.
>> Okay. Well, maybe we can set the stage a
little bit. So, uh, you came to our
attention because you you kind of had a
blockbuster paper that just came out
about glyobblastoma. Glyobblasto is a
notably difficult cancer. Uh, Shiler
studied it for many years and fatality
rates 5 years out are almost 100%. With
traditional treatments and yet with this
metabolic therapy in conjunction to the
standard of care, which is chemotherapy,
you see three, four years out people
that are cancer-free
like unheard of.
>> Not only that, when I was studying it at
least, and I haven't been in the field
in over a decade, but it seemed like
they hadn't really made progress with
the standard of care in more than 20
years at that point. And so that was
really shocking. Plus, the standard of
care I think improved overall survival
by a matter of months, right? Um so, so
it was a really I actually left that
field because it was so depressing. I
was just like, God, what are we doing
here? Um, so it's one of those diseases
that's generally taken as a death
sentence.
>> Yeah, exactly. And this paper seems to
suggest that there's an alternative
that's possible.
>> Yes, that's true. Um, it hasn't um
[clears throat] there's been no progress
in 100 years, not 20 years. If you go
back and look at the data from Bailey
and Cushing in 1926,
uh they said that people with
glyopblasto
uh and very aggressive brain tumors um
would survive anywhere from 8 8 to 14
months. Um which is today it's about 8
to 16 months. Um so that that's you got
an extra couple 3 months in 100 years.
Um,
so you're right. It it is, but it
doesn't have to be. Uh, it doesn't have
to be. This is the great tragedy. Uh, we
can we can manage that. We think we
think we can make four years the the
average survival rather than 15 or 16
months. Um, maybe even longer. Um I I
wrote a paper in 2010 in Lance at
oncology and we were just so upset
about the tragic loss of lives uh with
this disease GBM of course that I just
fired it out and I said let them know on
that and we we clearly said that the
standard of care is responsible for the
demise of of of these people. Um because
we as a neurochemist I understand the
glutamine glutamate cycle. Uh and we
know in the brain glutamine is a very
necessary
amino acid for the synthesis of
glutamate
uh which is an excitatory
neurotransmitter
and um it has to be removed very quickly
after being released. that is the
glutamate
because it it it impacts on NMDA
receptors and the neighboring neuron to
transmit signals from one cell to the
next. Um and if it's not removed
quickly, it can lead to excitatory
seizures and excytotoxic death of cells.
So we knew this and and we knew that as
soon as the glutamate is released into
the synaptic clft um the gal cells which
embrace the synaptic clft uh would take
up glutamate very rapidly and metabolize
the glutamate
uh to glutamine
uh which is not excitatory and the
glutamine would then be released
by the gal cell and taken up by the
neuron and the neuron would then
metabolize the glutamine back into
glutamate and consolidation in synaptic
vesicles and and this has been studied
in the neurochemistry field for decades.
It's called the glutamine glutamate
cycle and it protects the brain and
neurons from exyitotoxic death. uh there
had been some reports that in
glyobblasto
there was a a significant amount of uh
extracellular glutamate which was
leading to uh cytotoxic death uh of
neurons uh just in the micro environment
and I knew that there's plenty of
aststerytes that would be sucking this
up but then we also realized that the
tumor cells themselves depend heavily on
glutamine so if the glutamate is being
released from the neuron or the neuron
dies and a significant amount of
glutamate is now in the micro
environment. Um the the aststerytes will
will suck up this glutamate and then
dump it out as glutamine. And if there
are cancer cells in the micro
environment, they're going to be sucking
down the glutamine. And we we now uh at
that time in 2010
uh we knew that the bulking surgery
followed by radiation. Radiation heats
the brain and uh um uh and and uh would
would lead to significant neuronal
death. more glutamate glutamine cycle
disrupted. Uh any surviving neur uh g
tumor cells in the micro environment
would be bathed
in a fuel that they need to survive. And
not only that, after your brain is
irdiated and right after surgery and
even before surgery sometimes because
the the um necrosis and inflammation and
edema in the tumor micro environment is
treated by highdose steroids. So, so we
knew that the steroids would raise blood
sugar levels. And not only that, when
you irdiate somebody's brain, blood
sugar goes through the roof. It's an
attack on the body. So we have two fuels
that the tumor cells absolutely have to
have. The sugar glucose created by the
radiation and the steroids. And then we
have the uh glutamine being dumped uh
out onto the micro environment leading
to the survival of the tumor cells
making them massively resistant to any
further
uh attack by chemo or radiation. because
the waste products of glucose and
glutamine which we now know as lactic
acid and suinic acid protect the tumor
cells from any further
uh further attack. So they're so it the
reason why they recur and are resistant
because of the very treatments that
these poor folks are receiving by the
standard of care. It makes no damn
sense. If you have any clue about
neurochemistry, neurobiology, or cancer
biology, what you're doing to your
patients is essentially depriving them
of any possibility for long-term
survival. Um, I have published this over
and over again detailing all of this and
it falls on deaf ears because the system
is so profitable using radiation and
these crazy things that it's not
possible to shift gear regardless of
what the patient how it might affect the
patient. This is immoral, absolutely
immoral and ignorant on the part of the
field. So you take patients and you
don't do that and they live longer and
they can live a hell of a lot longer if
you didn't irdiate. and those papers
paper you're talking about because my
Greek colleagues were still forced to do
that stupid radiation and they know if
we didn't irdiate those p people we
could even get them to live far longer.
>> If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press pulse
protocol into your cancer management
just visit school.com/ keto forcancer
the new community by our research
analyst Johnny Rockermeer. Within this
new community platform, you can connect
with other patients and learn from their
experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement.
Starting with the general scientific
concepts by Dr. Thomas Ciphford. We will
show you how to start the ketogenic
diet, including which foods to choose
and which to avoid. Additionally, we
prepared a list of doctors specialized
in metabolic therapy, as well as details
about glutamine inhibition and
hyperbaric oxygen protocols. So, take a
look around at school.com/ keto for
cancer.
So there I was going to say, isn't that
a a piece of the ethical guidelines for
designing these studies is that you have
to maintain the standard of care when
comparing new therapies? Is there
something about that that I recall?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, the system locks in uh
it prevents alternative views to a
standard of care. So, so um they will
they'll say like at at Cedar Cyanide in
in Los Angeles um you can you can um uh
treat without standard you can treat
with standard of care but you have to
you you can't do metabolic therapy
unless you've already done standard of
care. So you've already stacked the deck
against the patient. So what are you
going to do about that?
>> That's your question.
>> Yeah. So, so were you using some sort of
uh uh was it let's see the tumors love
the glutamine. Were you using an
inhibitor of the glutamine
>> in this trial? I don't recall that.
>> No, we did not. That's another thing
that we could even advance we could even
improve the outcome even significantly
more.
>> And and what was the challenge to
pulling that off?
>> Why why couldn't you include that?
>> Well, uh it's still not readily
available. Um again this was done before
those some of those patients were being
treated years ago and um we now and and
it was before the big treatment protocol
that we just wrote at the end of 2024.
We've written a very comprehensive
treatment proto protocol which says
don't erdiate the brain basically. So
and we gave many many options of how you
how you how you uh negotiate the
treatment strategy depending on the
individual. Um you know one of one of
the authors on our papers is Dr. Dr.
Joseph Maroon, former president of the
neurosurgical society of America, and he
told me he operated on 400 GBM patients
on his life. Not one survived. So, uh,
he said, "We got to do something." So,
um, so you know, we know, we know, and I
gave a lecture to Henry Ford Cancer
Center to the radiation oncologists,
their whole division of radiation
oncology. How do you think that went
over when I told them you were killing
all your patients? you know, that didn't
go over well. Um, you might as well been
I all I did was get glares. Um, rather
than saying, well, I guess it was pretty
harsh to tell somebody that their whole
life is just like, what are you doing?
Um, and uh,
>> it's crazy, right? Because we've
convinced ourselves that our medical
interventions are a lot better than
anything that was done in the past. And
for we're we're working on a book right
now. And I was looking through the uh
Eers's Papurus, which was this medical
text that was unearthed from 1500 BC in
Egypt. And there's some stuff in there
that's kind of relevant to what we do
now, which is like various like
Belelladana for seizures.
>> You can make a couple of jumps and say,
well, it is a sedative and it does seem
to help in epilepsy. Guinea worm we
still treat the exact same way that we
used to treat. It's like a three- foot
long worm that the only way to get out
of the body is to just like slowly wind
it around a stick until it comes out.
Like we haven't figured anything better
out. But then there's these really crazy
things where they're like, "Okay, so if
you're blind, you have to take a
crocodile and uh a clay crocodile
effigy, stuff its mouth with herbs, and
then tie it to your head with a piece of
linen that has the names of God
inscribed in it." or you have to do uh
if for other eye problems you have to
take like the dust of granite and apply
it as a pus to the eyes and you look at
it and you're like this is insane but
they did it for hundreds if not
thousands of years without any real
reflection on whether or not it works
and we pat ourselves on the back all the
time about the fact that we have this
really evidence-based medicine
>> and if we've been doing the same thing
for go for hundred years and there's not
any improvement. It seems almost
incomprehensible like how are people not
looking at the standard of care and at
this conference just overwhelmed with
relief at the fact that somebody's
offering them some option that improves
outcomes.
>> Yeah, it's remarkable. You'd think they
would be excited about it. Um but uh
they're threatened uh or feel threatened
and um it's really it's really uh a very
unusual situation. But it's not it's not
when you go back and look at massive
paradigm changes from the past. Uh you
find the same kind of reaction uh by the
establishment. It's this is what I'm
experiencing here is no different than
than than what Galileo had to deal with.
and Guyodano Bruno and Kepler and these
other guys when when they were defining
the sun as the center of the solar
system. I mean this threatened the
supremacy of religious organizations and
things like this. So there and it takes
decades sometimes to accept uh even what
is obvious um and and and we still have
15% of the American public still thinks
the sun revolves around the earth. So we
we we've made a lot of advance but not
complete. Um and uh you know you can say
the same thing for Lewis Pastor. He was
brutalized even though he came up with
Arabies vaccine and found out that it
was germs that was causing infectious
diseases and the French hierarchy
belittled him. Um and we still have the
same problem with the Darwin Wallace
theory of evolution which you cannot
understand glyobblasto or any cancer
effectively unless you understand
evolutionary biology. It's not possible.
So if you have people that don't
understand evolutionary biology, they're
the same people that would put the uh
alligator stuff with herbs in your face,
you know. Um so uh
>> I'd like to believe that the like the
country's leading oncologists have at
least like a rudimentary
>> I think he's he's not putting at the
oncologist so much [laughter] as the
technicians like the technical radiation
oncologists like they are oncologists
but their job is to shoot people with
beams of radiation. like they what are
they going to do if they don't get to
shoot people with beams of radiation?
They've spent their whole lives training
to do that. It's like a whole cast of
society that's out of a job and they
can't teach an old dog new tricks
perhaps.
>> And not only that, they get very well
paid for this. I mean, you're talking
about these radiation oncologists get a
lot of money.
>> So, um, now I'm not saying all radiation
is bad. Uh I I think for brain it might
be for sure
>> but I think for u as a final removal of
some lesion uh a proton beam uh could be
the solution to the problem. Um
>> it does debulk the tumor significantly
like the short-term games are are
evident.
>> Yeah. But but you know if we if we take
a and again a glyobblasto and shrink it
down and make it less angry uh less
inflamed less angioenic
uh where now the surgeon can debulk uh a
far greater amount and uh what's
remaining may be uh susceptible to a
lowd dose chemo or even these parasite
medications that we have. But we would
not and we do not recommend radiation to
the brain for glyopblasto or any brain
cancer patient for that matter. Uh but
that does not mean we could not use
radiation for lung cancer, colon cancer
or something like that. If the lesion
remaining is tiny and uh compacted um
because if you don't do that, you could
run the risk of spreading it all over
the place. And and don't forget the the
reason why radiation it kills through
reactive oxygen. react a reactive oxygen
is like a a bomb. A local bomb blows up,
kills the cell. But if you don't kill
that cell and that cell is fermenting
glucose and glutamine, it's got kind of
an acid acidified shield around it,
making some of these
treatments ineffective for killing off
all the tumor cells. So you really have
to put the tumor regardless of where it
is because all what we have found is
that all tumors regardless of where
they're localized have the same
metabolic problem. They are powerfully
fermenting glucose and glutamine,
dumping out large amounts of lactic acid
and suinic acid and cannot shift to
ketone bodies or fatty acids to replace
glucose and glutamine. So what I just
told you is the solution to the cancer
problem in a nutshell. Um but that's not
taught in any medical school. Uh it's
not other than our papers. There's no
one else saying this. Uh yet we have all
the science to support uh what I'm
saying based on historical observations
from Otto Worerberg. We have a big paper
that'll be coming out just accepted for
publication in bioenergetics and
biomemembranes uh which really uh tells
the entire cancer field uh where we went
wrong and how to get back on track uh to
manage cancer effectively because it it
is a mitochondrial metabolic disease. So
the mitochondrial metabolic theory will
replace the somatic mutation theory and
then the field can start moving forward
uh with treatments that are far less
toxic and far more therapeutic because
it's based on the science as we know it.
>> Okay. So let's pull on a thread. What
were you going to say?
>> Well, I was going to say that it doesn't
it's probably not just the clinicians
that are an obstacle to adoption. It
seems like asking people to avoid sugar
in their diets is a huge ask as well.
What were you going to say? We can get
back to that.
>> Well, I was going to say if we can pull
on that thread of what Dr. Safed said
earlier, which is that you have to
understand evolutionary biology to
understand this theory
and I want to know what you mean by
that.
>> Yeah. So, the cancer cell is simply
falling back um on its uh default
energetic state which is fermentation.
All all uh organisms on our planet began
in a a toxic environment. There was no
oxygen in the environment. So all the
cells the living cells at that time were
fermenttors. There was no oxygen. They
were all single cell fermenttors and um
they would they would grow divide and
and and would live as long as there was
an availability of fermentable fuels in
the micro environment. Then we had
certain archa bacteria that were uh able
to produce oxygen and over time we
developed oxygenated environment. Um it
was the oxygenated environment that
allowed us to form metazzoans which are
multisellular organisms because the
fusion of the ara with other fermenting
organisms at that time now produced a
hybrid system uh where where where one
organism could use oxygen as an acceptor
of electrons and the other organism was
linked to a fermentation metabolism and
>> this is actually like held together in
the evolutionary system today cuz Like a
human cell, a ukareote has fermentation
that occurs in the gooey part, the
cytoplasm. And then the oxygen-based
metabolism occurs inside of the
mitochondria, which is supposed to be
this organism that merged with the
fermentor. This is what you're pointing
to.
>> And yes, and then we now we have
division of labor and we have energy
efficiency, which led to metazzones,
which are multisellular organisms. Now
we know uh from the work of Sonen
Shinado, Carlos and Anna down here at
Tus Medical School um they have been
professing for a long time that the uh
proliferation is the default state of
all um of all u metazzone cells. When
not when when no longer held in in check
they will naturally fall back on
proliferation. And what we have shown is
that the default energetic state is
fermentation. So when so what's keeping
cells quiescent and differentiated is
the action of the mitochondria
uh producing highly energy with using
oxygen as a as an acceptor of electrons
leading to a highly energetic state uh
allow allowing cells to differentiate
and form different organs and different
systems and and can operate under
different under different conditions.
Well, um the mitochondria energy uh
gradient inside that organel uh which
was has its own DNA as a matter of fact
relinquished all genes to the nucleus
except 13 genes as part of the electron
transport chain. So they essentially
control the destiny of the cell and when
the cell gets sick they release uh
cytochromes and the cell dies to protect
the rest of the the cells from any um
disregulated cell growth. So the organel
that controls the destiny of our
existence is the mitochondria.
>> Hold on. Can I stop you just for a
second?
>> Yeah.
>> Uh can you elaborate on the role of
cytochrome C? So cytochrome C is one of
the oxygen acceptors that's in the
electron transport chain.
>> Is it protective in the sense that it
just saps up all of the reactive oxygen
species that are released?
>> No. No, it doesn't do that. Um that's
glutathione that's in the in the
cytoplasm. You you have the pentos
phosphate pathway and you have the
glutathione system in in the cytoplasm
that that So what's the role of the
cytochrome C when
>> cytochrome C is the is the is called the
respiratory enzyme. This is what Otto
Warberg got the Nobel Prize for. He
found out that the protein that actually
allowed cells to use oxygen which is
cytochrome C. So when you when you take
cyanide you block cytochrome C's ability
to accept
move protons and you kill organism real
quick. So when cytochrome C is released
from the mitochondrian it's a signal to
die. So you're not expiring anymore. And
and that's called a program program cell
death. Apoptosis, program cell death,
which means the mitochondria are damaged
or inefficient in some way. Cytochrome C
is released sending off a signal to die.
That's called program cell death. Um,
>> and you're saying that's protective for
the other cells that are involved. Just
>> it it keeps an organization when you're
when you're not able to function
energetically any longer. uh there's a
program that uh triggers your death. So
>> it's basically protective for the
function of whatever organ the cell is
part of. So you don't start to
accumulate dysfunctional liver cells or
brain cells or whatever.
>> Yes. And and and and basically when
oxidative phosphorilation is chronically
uh disrupted over time uh which which is
the which was uh Albert Seni ancogenic
paradox. He he wrote that in 1977 in the
journal PNAS.
>> So one second. So for people that have a
hard time following the biochemistry,
oxidative phosphorilation is the process
of regenerating ATP from ADP. So we have
this molecule that travels around the
cell that is used as energy exchange for
the for for literally everything. Like
if you read n like Nick Lane's work,
he's basically making the argument that
we go through like more like there's
more power density in a human body over
the course of a day than there is in the
sun because we're constantly cycling
these molecules. As we shuffle them
through the cell and we break a
phosphate off of this molecule in order
to make some kind of reaction go, that
depleted molecule comes back into the
mitochondria and the mitochondria's
function appears to be to recover this
pool of molecules that are able to be
exchanged for work elsewhere in the
cell. And so oxidative phosphorilation
is the process of reproducing the pool
of this ATP molecule that you need.
>> Yes, absolutely. and and and and every
breath that we take, that's why we're
breathing here, every breath that we
take brings oxygen into the system.
Every exhale comes out, it's got CO2 and
water, moisture. So that's the waste
product. It's a the waste product of
oxidative phosphorilation
is is CO2 and uh and water. A and the
CO2 is are are the carbons from the
foods that that we ate. And and these
foods are broken down systematically in
the in the KB cycle. And then we
generate these reducing equivalents
which deliver their electrons to the
proteins of the electron transport chain
which is the mitochondria. And the
proteins are moved from one complex to
the next from one protein and they pump
protons into this inter
>> sorry you said proteins but it's you're
saying electrons. The electrons are
passed from complex to complex.
>> The the electrons are passed from
protein complex to protein complex
that's embedded in the inner membrane of
the mitochondria. Okay. And there's
lipids uh a and these lipids in the
inner membrane are facilitators of how
efficiently this whole thing will work
like cardioipin a unique lipid in the
inner membrane and the electrons are
passed from one from one complex uh to
another and these complexes are
multi-dimensional
protein conglomerates. Um and in the
process of moving the electrons, the
protons are pumped uh from the matrix
into this inner inner membrane to uh
space to form a gradient, a high proton
enriched gradient which then pass
through another protein complex called
the F10 ATPAS and that spins like an
impeller. And you're right, there's a
transporters that bring ADP into these
mitochondrian and the and the and the
phosphate is then added to ADP to form
ATP which is so highly efficient with
the waste products of CO2 and water. So
most of the energy in our cells is
coming from this oxidative
phosphorilation. Okay. So, so in cancer
that process becomes gradually uh
corrupted not acutely because if you
acutely disrupt oxfos you kill the cell
and the and the example of that is
cyanide. Look how fast you will die.
There's no that's called rapidly acute
death because you block cytochrome C you
block the movement of the electrons
through the complex and you and you
block the ability of of oxy of of oxygen
to be reduced to water. So this is
basically how fast you can die. Now that
does not happen in cancer it's a gradual
uh process. Uh and we and when I go back
to the ankcogenic paradox of of Albert
Seni he always he said something unique
about cancer. It can be caused by almost
anything we can think of. Um whether
it's a virus an inflammation a radiation
a chemical carcinogen intermittent
hypoxy or viruses. He says it seems like
anything and everything and anything has
the potential to cause cancer. But he
was unfamiliar with the common
pathophysiological mechanism which
allowed a cell to lose its growth
control and become disregulated in
growth which is cancer. Cancer is growth
is growth control is is disregulated
cell growth or cell division out of
control. So what is what is responsible
for the control? Why cells don't do
this? And the answer is because the
mitochondria control the cell cycle
through the proton motive gradient. They
are controllers of the cyclones. They
determine when a cell needs to divide or
not divide. So they are the determiners
of cell existence and destiny. And when
that organ,
>> it's also worth pointing out that I
think a lot of people have a model of
the cell that they have from like an
introductory biology textbook where
there's maybe like one mitochondrian,
>> but there are hundreds of mitochondria
per cell. They're moving around the
cell. There's this is like an immense
part of the cellular resources are
directed and put towards the maintenance
and the survival of the mitochondria
because they almost it's crazy because
you can look at these videos of uh
>> uh light microscopy where they've tagged
the mitochondria and you can see they're
actively moving around the cell. They
seem to be organisms inside of cells.
They are
>> that are actively doing things still
which is crazy.
>> It's a hybrid system and and my
colleague Dr. uh um Shannonopoulos
Christo Shannonopoulos from Seml Weise
University. He's a world leader on
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation which we can get into um
but he has that same video with it's
like a spaghetti network. It's like a
bunch of worms in the cytoplasm. They
are very active. Uh the nucleus sits
there as some um you know uh uh dormant
thing but it's the movement and the
activity of the mitochondri. fuse. They
come together or they break apart. They
they have their own DNA, but the DNA is
in these little circles and and and they
have numbers of these different kinds of
circles of DNA. They're a very active
dynamic organel that leads to the entire
energy balance and destiny of the cell.
Ultimately, it's responsible to second
law thermodynamics, which is disorder.
uh when mitochondria become corrupted
over age uh they become gradually more
more and more less capable of
maintaining energy balance and you die.
So you die because your mitochondria no
longer able to maintain a a current
across the membrane. So um and and that
goes back to the membrane. What's this
current that because you can't live if
you don't have a current that's called
equilibrium and equilibrium is death. So
you need energy to to um prevent
equilibrium and every cell has a
different uh uh uh electrochemical
gradient across the membrane. For
example, the heart has about a minus 88
or something like that. Which means
because the heart muscle is pumping,
pumping, pumping, pumping. In order for
do that, it has to have a very powerful
uh sodium potassium ATPAS and calcium
ATP's ATPAS breaking down ATP. Uh you
contrast that with an arythro site um
which is a blood cell that carries
oxygen around our body picks up oxygen
from the lung delivers it to the tissues
picks up the CO2 from the tissues
delivers it back to the to the lung.
Okay, that has a electrochemical
gradient of -6 millolts compared to the
the minus 88 millolts of the the
cardiac. [clears throat]
So um interestingly enough uh what
because the the ariththraite has no
mitochondria and no nucleus. Its job is
simply to is to transport gases uh
through the body and it then eventually
it's it's it's recycled but it still has
an electrochemical gradient a very low
electrical chemical gradient and the
energy for that organel for that cell
comes purely from fermentation because
there is no oxidative phosphorilation.
So they have a small fermentation and
they only need to produce a slight
gradient enough to to remove gases.
Whereas cardiac meioytes and neurons
which have a very powerful role have
very steep electrochemical gradients and
therefore they have to have a lot more
energy and that energy is delivered by
oxidative phosphorilation. Neurons and
cardiomyioes rarely if ever become
cancer because they can't shift to a
fermentation metabolism. So they that's
why you can know why these neurons never
form cancer. Not never, but rarely if
ever cardiac meioytes only cells that
have the capability of transitioning
from a fermentation from oxidative
phosphorilation to a fermentation
metabolism have the ability to form
disregulated cell growth all controlled
by the mitochondria. So people need to
uh appreciate more the or this
importance of this organel. Yet the
whole cancer field was based on sematic
mutations in the nucleus. So our the
focus of the field was on something
other than the important issue which was
mitochondrial biology and so so
>> so so the ankcoenic paradox come down to
different means of injuring the
mitochondria.
>> Yes.
>> Is that what you're suggesting?
>> Yes. Every one of those different
injuries has a way to chronically
disrupt oxidative phosphorilation
leading to uh what we call substrate
level phosphorilation which is the
evolutionary conserved way that we had
got energy before oxygen came into the
onto the atmosphere 2.5 billion years
ago. This was all single cell all devel
fermentation and the cells would
continue to divide as long as they had
fermentable fuels. Cancer cells are
doing the exact same thing. the very
organel that's maintaining
differentiated state and energy
efficiency has lost that. So the kill
switch, the kill even though they can
release cytochrome C, they're already
locked into a fermentation metabolism
and they bypass programmed cell death
and they continue to grow in a
disregulated way. As long as they have
the fermentable fuels in the environment
to do that, once you remove those
fermentable fuels, these guys can't
survive. And we interrogated them with
all the different we asked whatever
amino acids, how many other sugar, what
what what keep these alive. Our big
paper just showed this. We interrogated
all 20 amino acids. We interrogated
everything and just ask what keeps these
cells alive. And we were able to find
it's glucose and glutamine and they're
powerfully synergistic. So when they get
together, they will drive a disregulated
cell growth through a fermentation
metabolism involving substrate level
phosphorilation. Another big thing we
found is that the damn mitochondria can
ferment. There are fermenttors too.
There's a fermentation mechanism inside
the mitochondria. It's called
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation driven by the amino acid
glutamine. Glutamine is fermented inside
the mitochondria. This is big. This is
what was keeping everybody from
understanding what the hell was going on
in these cancer cells. It's
unbelievable. Once you understand what I
know,
>> what's up with the ariththraittes,
right? Because they don't uh seem to
develop cancers either. No, they don't
have a nucleus. You got to have a
nucleus to divide. So, if you don't have
a nucleus, they're going to divide. So,
so they don't have a mitochondria or a
nucleus, and they can't they can't
divide. You have to have a cell that can
divide. And what controls the division
and regulation is the mitochondria. So,
a cell will that can divide will divide
will will will proliferate like crazy uh
uh uh if if if if it doesn't have a a
regulatory system to keep it in in in a
in a in a stable state. And that's the
mitochondria. That's why it's falling
back on on the um default state which is
proliferation driven by a substrate
level phosphorilation. And then you
>> how listen how do you prove that? Pull a
pull the plug on the glucose and
glutamate and watch them die.
>> Well, one's easier than than the other
for for everyday people, right? So, we
can control our diet. Um but glutamine
or glutamate is an essential amino acid.
in almost all of our food. And so that's
a little trickier, right? You know, um
I've had family members and friends
going through cancer therapies and I've
talked to them a lot about uh your work
and the the piece of the puzzle that's
really tricky is is the glutamate, the
glutamine glutamate side of things.
>> Okay, I want you to repeat after me.
There is no diet that can target
glutamine. Can you guys say that?
>> I understand that. Yeah. [laughter]
>> Okay. Well, so this is actually really
interesting because uh when we when we
had this friend who had uh breast
cancer, I started looking into it and I
realized that the agents that are used
to control glutamine and glutamate are
basically chemotherapy agents, right?
Because you have to do you have to block
this the proteins that are involved in
this synthesis pathway, right?
>> Uh well, I I don't know about that uh in
regard to that. Well, but you're right.
We can easily control glucose in our
environment. It's a non-essential fuel.
Our body can make it under under
restricted conditions through the
process of gluconneogenesis.
But the glutamine the glutamine is an
essential they call it a non-essential
amino acid because it can be produced
from glucose uh by a glutamine
synthetase reaction. Um the problem is
for cancer it's absolutely essential. Um
and for our immune system it's essential
and for our gut it's essential. ura
cycle. It's needed. So, you have an
amino acid that's absolutely essential
for our um normal physiological
functions. Um and and and it's the
highest amino acid in our bloodstream.
It it's it's the most abundant. It's
about 500 um microar
uh.5 millolar and it's higher than all
the other amino acids and it's there for
an essential reason for the gut, for the
immune system. Before we get attacked by
bacteria or a burn or something that
lets bacteria into our into our body, uh
our immune cells uh use glutamine as a
fuel to kill bacteria and to perform its
normal function. So do our gut needs
glutamine uh gut health. So so um a lot
of sometimes you see people that are
irdiated for cancer get highdosese
glutamine to repair their gut from being
brutalized. Um, so, so you have an an
amino acid that the the cancer cell
absolutely needs and our immune system
absolutely needs. So you you you have
the same fuel uh uh that these tumor
cells uh need to grow and and our immune
system needs to kill the tumor cells and
they're they're both going to need the
same fuel. That's why I developed the
press pulse therapeutic strategy where
we press glucose down tight uh and
exercise because the exercise will pull
the glucose out of the out of the
bloodstream. Our brain uh can switch to
ketone bodies and but it will take what
little glucose might be there and that
leaves not much for the cancer cell. So
now you come in with your strategic
targeting of glutamine but you do it in
a strategic way. You don't do it in a
non-strategic way. You have to know that
your immune system is going to be
needed. You got to maintain gut health.
You have to you have to remain m uh um
immune system health. So, but here's the
interesting thing. When you take away
glutamine from the immune system, it
doesn't kill them. Uh it just paralyzes
them. They can't perform their normal
function. But when you take the
glutamine away from the tumor cell, it
kills them as long as you put the noose
around the glucose. So, it's a balanced
system. So what we do is we put the
noose around glucose and then we come in
with a pulse of a glutamine inhibitor
like 60 deoxy or leucine dawn paralyzes
the immune system but slaughters these
tumor cells then you pull the drug out
you don't give you let you let the
patient recover the immune system then
immediately becomes active because they
weren't killed they were just paralyzed
so they come in and start picking up the
dead corpses from the tumor cells and
cleaning up the im cleaning up the
environment and protecting the gut and
then you come in and pulse glutamine
just glut glutamine targeting just just
while you while you choke hold the
glucose and then the patient's tumor
gradually gets degraded and and you
don't suffer from hair loss and all the
diarrhea fatigue and all this crazy
that people do you once you understand
evolutionary biology and you understand
the biology of the tumor this is far
less complicated than people have made
it out to be the problem that I'm
telling you is unknown to the majority
of people who work in the cancer field
even though we publish these papers in
open access peer-reviewed journals over
and over and over and over again. They
don't read it. They [laughter] don't
read the
>> even worse even if if like when when I
tell you know I I literally know people
who want to try these things but they
don't have access to these protocols,
right? Like how does somebody get
involved in this glutamine pulsing
protocol?
>> Well, that's what we wrote the big
treatment protocol with. We had, you
know, 30 authors on this MDs, PhDs,
nutritionists, bi biochemists,
physicians, the whole group. um that set
the standard. This will be the standard
of care for cancer in the future. It
should be today to we can save so many
lives. You know, we have we have uh
1,700 people a day in the United States
dying from cancer at 70 people per hour.
And these people are usually dying
horrific deaths. Um they're they're not
surviving the toxic treatments that
they're given to these folks. Whether
you have a brain tumor, colon cancer,
lung cancer, breast tumor, they keep
poisoning irdiating these people using
imunotherapies that sometimes work but
sometimes can kill you. Um, and that's
based so you have to say under what
theory is your treatment being applied
to me and if they say well it's a
genetic some people don't even know they
don't even know what the hell theory
they're working under. So if you're
saying it's a genetic disease then
you're working under the sematic
mutation theory and our new paper that
will be just accepted will be coming out
in a few weeks that clearly shows that
the sematic mutation theory is in I is
no longer a credible theory to explain
uh the the origin or treatment of
cancer. So once once they come to know
this it will allow original thinkers to
say we got to go this direction. You
either get on this direction or get the
hell out of the way because you're
partially responsible for the death rate
of these poor folks.
>> Is it going to be possible for somebody
to take this piece of research to their
oncologist and say, "I want to try this
protocol."
>> Yes. And guess what happens? Never heard
of it. Can't be any good. No clinical
trials. And they throw it right back in
your face over and over again. And then
when the people do it themselves and
they do really well, they come back to
the oncologists and the oncologist says,
"Wow, this is unbelievable. I've never
seen anything like this. Do I I don't
want to know what you're doing. Just
keep doing what you're doing."
>> Well, they can't be doing the uh amino
acid inhibitor, right?
>> Oh, sometimes they do. You can you can
What we found was the uh um we don't use
Don, but we can use Mendazol and Fen
Bendazol and these kinds of things.
>> Is that some like over-thec counter
business or something? Yeah,
>> dog dewormers and things like this.
>> Why? So people say, "Why would you pull
that out of your ass and do that?"
Because I did the damn research for
crying out loud. We found out that the
the embendazol uh parasite medicate the
parasites and the cancer cells use
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation.
The the energy metabolism of a parasite
and a tumor cell are very are very
similar. But the parasite has a
mitochondria that's not dysfunctional.
The cancer cell has a dysfunctional
mitochondria, but they're both using the
same metabolic pathways. So, parasite
medications, especially under low
glucose conditions, are you kidding me?
Exercise low glucose, take parasite
medications. It destroys these tumors.
Unbelievable. So, but I tell people
this, I publish the articles and they
choose to ignore it. So, what are you
going to do? Uh um you know what? What
what what I hear me, they go out and
they run to their oncologist. Oh, I want
metabolic therapy. Give me Oh, no. We
can't do it. It's not part of the
standard care. I never heard of it. It
were really good. I would have heard
about it in a medical school. We have to
retrain the entire oncology field to
understand what cancer is. That's the
problem. You don't have knowledgeable
people. What is a guy on the street
going to do? Oh my god. I I'm I blood. I
have a colon problem. I I have a lung.
I'm bl you know coughing up blood. What
is he runs down to Dana Farber, MD
Anderson, Sloan Ketaring runs down to
these guys and they nuke and poison the
guy. So, so, uh, um, I never heard
cancer was a metabolic disease. Well,
for Christ's sake, man, get out of the
way. You're, you're not moving the field
forward. Read the literature. If you
can't understand it, I'll be happy to
explain it to you if you can't
understand it.
>> Well, can I bring it back to the point
that I tried to raise earlier about the
patient adoption? Because this is
something that I've run into personally
as well, which is that even if someone
is confronted with the fact that they
can make a dietary modification to spare
themselves the pain of chemotherapy and
probably achieve much better outcomes.
There's a certain type of person that
can't conceive of not eating bread or or
candy or soda pop or all of the you know
these are legitimately addictive
substances that actually do get you high
>> and people are used to it in their daily
lives and
>> it's it's really really difficult with a
subset of the population to convince
them that to do that. And so if some
person in a white coat is offering them,
you know, even a miserable experience
like chemotherapy, uh it it somehow
seems appealing to a certain portion of
the population. And I'm afraid that it's
a large portion of the population.
>> Oh, I agree with you. And and if you
look at the reasons why those folks from
our our glyopblasto trial uh the ones
who did not adhere to the diet, which
wasn't a bad diet, it was actually
salmon and olive oil and things like
this, uh calorie restricted, they they
thought that they didn't want to eat the
salmon and they take the olive oil. Uh
they thought the radiation and chemo was
enough. They did enough and they all
died except one person. So that's the
choice of the person. Listen, you can if
you it's your precious soul. If you
don't want to exist on the planet, you I
mean I I've seen it myself. Um I've had
um spouses telling the other spouse,
"Stop eating the carbohydrates. This
woman died in their in theospice with
the Hershey barge all over her lap." You
know, I mean, yes, you're 100% correct,
but what those are hopeless people. I
mean, you can't do it. If they don't
care about their their soul and their
existence, why should we care about it?
You know,
>> I think I think that population could be
winnowed down if the people in white
coats were promoting it. I I think
there's there's something about the
escape hatch of the white coat telling
you that
>> that's stupid, you know, on top of it
being difficult if somebody in an
authority position isn't reinforcing. I
think it really takes coaching is what I
I'm trying to say is that if you really
want to get somebody in any addictive
situation to move beyond that, they're
going to need some sort of counseling
along the way. You're going to have to
be checking in with them. Hey, how's the
diet going? I know it's hard. blah blah
blah like you know but if the if the
white coat is just saying that's stupid
um just take these you know toxins
>> well that's why that's why we developed
the glucose ketone index calculator uh
which is a quantitative measure to allow
the patient to know what zone they're in
so and they could get the data off their
cell phone from the keto mojo meter and
therefore they will know whether or not
they're whatever they're doing is is
helping or hindering uh uh and and don't
forget a lot of these chemos
uh that we could use in very low dosages
uh become far more therapeutic. So we
don't throw out all the tools of the
standard of care. We just re re-evaluate
how they're being used. But the the
glucose ketone index calculator, which
is what we we developed here at Boston
College, um allows the patient to know
when they have low glue uh low glucose
and elevated ketones to a certain level,
a quantitative number, 2.0 and below. As
a matter of fact, we're going and not
only that, it works for um preventing
cancer a and chronic disease uh because
all chronic diseases in one way or
another including cancer involve
mitochondrial dysfunction. So you have
now a quantitative uh measure to reduce
risk for for uh for chronic diseases
which include a whole range of things um
as well as cancer. and you know um if
you want to party a little bit uh where
your where your number is going into
what what zone and how long you want to
live in these zones. So your green zone
is like 2.0 and below. That'll that'll
um significantly put pressure on
surviving tumor cells based on the
glucose uh part. Um but you can stay
healthy. We call it the maintenance
health maintenance zone from about 2 to
12 uh GKI. Anything above 50, you're
putting yourself in in an inflammatory
zone. So,
>> what is this? How does this calculator
work?
>> You take a a a blood, it's a it's a um a
glucose ketone meter.
>> I see.
>> And right now, you take a a a prick of
your finger and you take a glucose stick
and you get a drop of blood and put it
into the machine, the meter, the Mojo,
and it reads what your glucose is uh in
millimar. And then you squeeze your
finger a little bit more and you take
the ketone strip and touch it to the
drop of blood and you put that into the
meter and then you push the button GKI
and it gives you the ratio of blood
sugar to blood ketone bodies.
>> I see. So this is a device that you have
and then you're basically doing like
pinp prick tests.
>> Yeah. Well, the ping just like a
diabetic would do, you know, to to
maintain. So, so but for cancer and and
chronic disease management, uh you can
easily put yourself into these new zones
and then you would come to the the
realization of what you can and cannot
eat. If the bread you're eating is
highly carbohydrate blood, you're going
to see a massive spike in your GKI. But
maybe more natural complex carb breads
will not will not do that. And everybody
will be on a uh will have will have
their own biology, their own numbers,
and they'll be always looking on their
phone to see what what zone they're in
based on the glucose ketone index
calculator.
>> Are you passionate about the
groundbreaking and heroic research of
Dr. Thomas Cipher on metabolic therapy
and cancer? So are we. That's why we've
created something special for you in
collaboration with Johnny Rockermeer, a
German book publisher and translator.
Introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr. Safereed's work. Dive
into the science and discoveries. These
summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear,
concise, and engaging way. Whether
you're new to the subject or a seasoned
enthusiast, our books offer insights
that can change your life. Ready to
explore this transformative knowledge?
Visit our website at www.cancer cancer
as a metabolic disease.com to get your
copy. You can buy the ebook there
directly and the paperbook via the
provided links. Here's the best part. A
portion of every purchase goes directly
to support Dr. Thomas Safe Reed's
groundbreaking research. That's why the
direct ebook purchase is the best option
to donate as much as possible. You can
see all of the donations Mr. Rocker has
already made at www. ketoforcancer.net.
That's right. when you buy our books,
you're not just
>> but right now uh it's only it's only
done in cancer patients um to uh but we
can prevent you can't get cancer if your
mitochondria remain healthy and it's
hard to get chronic diseases if your
mitochondria remain healthy. You have to
realize again in evolutionary biology
our paleolithic ancestors were always in
a state of nutritional ketosis because
there was no car high carbohydrate
processed foods anywhere to be
available. Not if we gave it to them, of
course they would eat it, but but they
there there wasn't it wasn't available.
You were killing eating animals,
mastadons and buffaloos and all this
kind of stuff. You you were we were
responsible for the extinction of
several large species because we killed
and ate them. So uh um and there's not
there's not a lot of carbohydrate in a
beef liver or or in the the fl or the
marrow of a of a mastadon. So so u so
you're always our ancestors were always
in a state of nutritional ketosis. uh
not because they wanted to be because
they they didn't really have any
choices. It was our technology that
continued to improve during the
Neolithic period developing corn, wheat,
rice. Civilizations depended around the
fact that we didn't have to hunt and
gather any longer. But that put us then
at risk for uh different kinds of
chronic chronic diseases which are
exploding today because we have
internationally highly processed foods.
Uh, I got a Twinkie here that I always
use my class. This Twinkie, if you see,
they look pretty good, right? You see
them there?
>> Okay. These are 12y old Twinkies. All
right. They look they're they're a
little stale. A mouse broke in uh last
year and ate one. So, he didn't seem to
be concerned about its age. But, but but
but the issue is we ate we're eating
this crap. And then WE WANT WE HAVE
DIABETES, CANCER, HYPERTENSION,
cardiovascular disease, uh all this
stuff. And because our ancestors never
had this um not that they wouldn't want
it, but but uh they died from infections
and injuries. We didn't have orthopedic
surgeons and we didn't have antibiotics.
So they died from from injury and
infections where today you
>> ever are you ever tempted to eat one of
those Twinkies late at night in the
office?
>> No, not the not the 12y old one,
[laughter] but but if you go to if you
go to Atlanta, there's a bar in c in in
in central Atlanta. uh um central city
called the Nook um uh and they take
fresh Twinkies and deep fry them
>> and put chocolate syrup and powdered
sugar on top of it
>> and [snorts] and that people are
knocking each other down to get to these
Twinkies.
>> It's unbelievable. I mean, I'm
[laughter] sure I'm sure it's tasty. I
think that um they also do like deep
fried Mars bars at uh state fairs and
stuff like that,
>> you know. Well, the thing of it is
>> box. [laughter]
Yeah, I got a I bought it. You know,
when they when Hostess ran out of ran
out,
>> [clears throat]
>> uh they were going to sell 10 years ago.
I said, I better get some just to have
it as a prop for my class. And
>> seriously, there's kind of a dark thread
to this, right? Where you essentially
have the advent of agricultural
populations, which sustains essentially
a slave class. So, you can have these
huge armies and so forth. it's very
cheap compared to uh hurting animals
around and and you can you know and so
we're in a situation that still persists
where eating a ketogenic diet can be a
little on the expensive side of things
like I I myself have been doing it for
about a year now for uh not because I
had cancer or anything but for some
other other reasons that I wanted to try
to improve in my own health and um it
does tend to cost a little bit more from
like eating meat like especially good
stuff right if you want to get like
really if you really want to try to
find, you know, locally raised stuff and
like, you know, healthy sources of all
of this and also ecologically friendly
sources. It's not cheap. Um, and and I
wonder if, you know, you can buy a pizza
for what, 10 bucks or something and get
your whole caloric content for the day
very quickly. Um, and so I I I worry
that there's a side of this as well that
that pushes people away from it just
because it it's in some sense
economically
unplausible for a lot of people.
>> Oh, you're 100% correct because in some
underserved populations, they have food
deserts and and the only food available
is high highly processed carbohydrates,
putting putting them at risk uh for all
these chronic diseases. and and and and
and if they want to go outside the food
desert to get a a nutritious uh diet uh
with low carbohydrate, uh it costs them
they can't afford it. Um so they eat the
um the high processed foods, whether
it's donuts, uh hamburgers, pizzas, or
whatever. And and when you do metabolic
therapy, um you know, if you have acute
cancer, you might want to consider um uh
not eating some of that until until you
put your tumor in check. But the goal is
for us never to say what you can and
cannot eat. Um that uh no government or
people should say that makes people want
to eat it more or or whatever. Uh but
just just to be aware and and a lot of
people aren't even aware of this. The
federal government is not uh issuing any
warning signs at all. I know Michelle
Obama did. She tried to do that to tell
get out and exercise a little bit more,
eat a little bit more fresh uh stuff.
And then she was kind of vilified by the
industry for doing that. Um which is
which is which is again immoral. Uh she
was saying the right thing. Um and they
kind of discounted that and and uh um
but with a glucose ketone index uh you
can now know better and that doesn't
cost the meter is cheap and now we're
developing free Libra. You can have
these arm patches that will give you
real time blood sugar and in as the
technology improves, you'll have
real-time ketones and you'll be able to
do a GKI directly on your arm. So, know
where you are at all times. And then
>> I got these little uh just urine sticks
for the ketones that I don't know how
effective or accurate they are, but they
do seem to in some sense at least
grossly tell you whether you're in
ketosis or not.
>> Yeah, that's true. Uh they do. And and
we always say because the ketone strips
are more expensive than the glucose
strips for the meter. So you can use ur
urine strips uh for for the in between
times. Um but but you know where if this
technology of monitoring physiological
health uh on cell phones from arm
patches and things like this at least
give people an idea uh to choose uh how
they want to live and what they want to
do. And if that could be integrated with
coaching uh and folks and the and the
medical establishment all working
together uh you're going to drop chronic
diseases and you're going to drop death
from cancer for sure because we can use
metabolic therapy not only to prevent
cancer but once you have cancer then we
just modify the the the treatments in a
little bit different way to kill tumor
cells rather than keeping normal cells
healthy. So you keep normal cells
healthy, you prevent cancer. But if you
if you have cancer, you can still use
the same ketone body to to to replace
glucose um uh and then target the tumor
cells. So it's really quite flexible. Uh
and it all it'll all it's all going to
come down the pike because we can't
continue to live the way we're doing. Uh
and we have to modify it for the very
questions that and issues that you guys
are raising. But it but without any
knowledge at all and having no clue
about what what then there's everybody's
lost. They don't know what to do. Can I
eat this? Can I eat that? What what
about this? What about that? And then
you run into all these charlatans who
say, "Oh, take this supplement, that
supplement." These guys have no clue
what they're doing. You have to have
some scientific credibility to know
what's going on. So, so all of this is
the future. What I'm telling you right
now is is is the future because we're
not doing it today.
>> Pardon the interruption, but I have to
ask you for a favor. If you are
listening to this podcast and you like
what you hear and you would like to
support the project, please come [music]
over to patreon.com/demystifiesai.
For just.75 cents a week, which is not
very much at all, you can help us keep
the ship [music] going indefinitely. You
can help us go record conversations in
person. You can help us plan future
conferences. You can help us [music]
turn the paradigm around and bring forth
a scientific revolution the likes
[music] of which the world has never
seen. I'll see you over at patreon.com.
Let's talk about this femazole
meendazole uh potential
advent to to ketogenic diet because uh
while you guys were talking I looked up
a paper from anti-cancer research uh it
looks like it might be a Vietnamese
group that basically published on oral
femazol for cancer therapy in human and
animals and early on in the paper they
mentioned that femazole garnered global
attention as a potential anti-cancer
therapy following the complete recovery
success story of Joe Tippens who was
diagnosed with small cell lung cancer.
He was in a clinical trial for a novel
anti-cancer drug but under the guidance
of a veterinarian started administering
self-administering 200 milligrams of
oral femazol uh vitamin E supplements
CBD oil and curcumin and after three
months of self-administration a PET scan
revealed no detectable cancer cells in
his body and he was the only patient
cured among the thousand patients in the
study. Everybody's like anecdata plural
of anecdote is not data. And if you
start looking at you know femazol
meendazole uh mechanisms of action
they're tubulin inhibitors which is this
like structural component of parasite
cells. So can we take apart the biio
mechanics of these compounds inside of
cancer cells? Like what are they doing?
>> Yeah. Well, that the tubulant hypothesis
was put out u that but you have to also
realize that the formation of tubulants
requires a lot of energy.
>> So uh ATP again we're back to energy
without energy nothing can live nothing
can form nothing can do anything without
energy. Uh we have a paper that was
bioarchchives paper and we're working on
it here. We've shown that Mbendazol
which is very similar to fenbendazol
uh targets the ability of the cell to
use sugar glucose and also disrupts
glutaminolysis pathway which is the
glutamine. It's not as powerful as dawn
but it's doing the same thing. That's
what the act that's what's going on with
those with those things the tubulant
issue because you have vin christristen
which is a very toxic chemo and that
targets tubulant and you get sick as a
dog but you don't you can oh if if if
ven bendazol is is working because it's
targeting tumula how come you're not so
sick like you would be if you took ven
christristen what what what what is what
is uh fenbendazol doing so um in India
where they did a lot of this work
because of the parasites the large
number of members mbers of their
population have parasites. So there was
a lot of basic research over decades on
on these kinds of antiparasitic drugs
and and between the Chinese and the
Indians they showed that fenbendazol and
mbendazol block uh glucose transporters.
Wow. So you're going to inhibit a little
bit on the gly so it's going to block
down glycolysis which is is cytoolic
substrate level phosphorilation. One of
the two fermentation pathways driving
the disregulated growth. And our new
findings that we're working on next door
as I speak is showing that this um
embendol also um uh disrupted the
glutaminolysis pathway which is the
fermentation of glutamate. So we're
seeing exactly what we've been saying.
So um why those things work is because
and then you put the patient into
nutritional ketosis while you're giving
these parasite medications, it works
even better without toxicity. So um
yeah, we're we're working it. published
that but it's not it's bioarchchives. It
was we we developed a therapy for
pediatric brain cancer uh which if they
used it they could well we'd have I I
it's tragic tra tragic what we're doing
to these little kids in the in the brain
with brain tumors radiating hacking them
apart and everything when all we have to
do is put them on finendazol or
mbendazol in calorierestricted ketogenic
diets um and and and and manage it that
way. Uh but boy they would never touch
that with it. You know what's really
weird is that if you have a child with
epilepsy, uh they're on one part of the
corridor, you treat children with
epilepsy with ketogenic metabolic
therapy, but god forbid just down the
corridor, they're radiating and
poisoning little kids with brain tumors
when they could be using embendazol,
fenbendazol, they could be using um uh
ketogenic metabolic therapy for managing
the cancer in these little kids as well.
This is the craziness of the medical
profession. It's like what the hell? And
and it took years before it took the
work of Jim Abrams, the movie maker with
Meryill Streep and others to bring
attention to the fact that you can
manage epilepsy with diet and and
lifestyle issues. So, so um but no, you
can't do that for cancer. Uh this is
taboo going down that direction. So, but
but people want to live and they don't
want to be brutalized and you got to
have a a knowledgeable group of people.
So, when you're talking about um Joe
Tippens, Yeah. Joe Joe used a fen
bendazol and cocktails of parasite
medications work real well but you can't
make any money on that. This is old
elchipo stuff and don't forget revenue
say it revenue generation first patient
outcome second. Say it revenue
generation first patient outcome second.
I remember that there was a uh one of
the consulting firms or some investment
firm put out a brief that was talking
about uh business models for the medical
industry
>> and the title of the presentation was is
curing patients a sustainable business
strategy
>> and I'm like uh no probably not. I mean
if you can just basically give people
something that they can do at home and
some kind of cheap medicine.
>> Yeah. Well, I think we we we have to
we're not against revenue generation. I
just don't know how to do that. Uh my
job is to kill cancer cells without
toxicity. That's what I know how to do.
>> But it might be that it's another
business.
>> Yeah. Well, but somebody's going to
figure it out. We're a very innovative
species. Uh if there's money to be made,
we'll figure out how to make it. And uh
but I'll leave it to those entrepreneur
type people. Um I I don't our our goal
is just to see how many because if
you're right then then the overall
outcome should be survival with high
quality of life or or program what do
they call it progressionfree survival
and overall survival should be
significantly improved. I get I get a
lot of um uh enjoyment uh out of that.
If I see some guy who did metabolic
therapy and his physician told him, "Oh,
you have nine months to live." And he's
out five years later, uh, because I did
met he did metabolic therapy according
to our program. I feel good about that.
I don't need to make a billion dollars
on something like that. Um, but but it
it lets us know we're on the right path.
So, I'll let somebody else figure out
how you're going to make a billion
dollars on that. But but that's their
that's their goal because that's what we
are. We're very innovative in what we
can do. and how to make a buck is
there's always that kind of a guy. So,
um but you always want it to be
available for the underserved people.
They're getting hammered unnecessarily.
Uh the poor and underserved folks, the
minority groups and those guys, they
they're really being brutalized. So, um
and because they don't know number one,
there's an educational issue, there's an
exploitation issue, there's a lot of
other kinds of issues, availability of
things issues. So, so um yeah, so that
so that lets me know that if we're on
the right path and we can keep people
alive, it shouldn't be myster Oh, this
guy lived with a GBM for four and a half
years. Oh my god. No, that should be the
standard, not the exception. I say, so
we got
>> I did discover a really funny loophole.
I I had to present at APS the physics
conference last year and uh so I had to
eat out for several days. I was in
Minnesota and I discovered very quickly
that there's a strange loophole at
restaurants where if you you know you
order you go to like a hamburger place
or something, right? You order the
hamburger and of course if you're eating
keto, you don't get the bun, right? But
the funny thing is they don't really
have anything in their computers for the
most part. If you want to add an extra
hamburger patty, it's basically a dollar
or two. And so you can eat a lot of meat
at restaurants by ordering an extra
chicken patty, an extra hamburger patty.
It's really quite hilarious. I'm sure
it's terrible quality meat, but
>> I mean, it is a funny loophole.
>> What? Next time you go to Minnesota, go
to Manny's Manny's Steakhouse. Have you
been there yet? [snorts]
>> I don't think that I went there.
>> Good stuff.
>> I'm not I mean, that's the biggest
steaks. You're going to find tomahawk
ribe eyes and these big steaks.
Unbelievable.
>> I did go to this Brazilian steakhouse
that was pretty amazing. [laughter]
Yeah, I never been into anything like
that before.
>> Well, you know, uh steak, high quality
beef, uh again, uh is is is good for
keeping low low GKI, low low glucose
ketone index. Um you know, chicken and
you can at PES uh like our the people in
that breast cancer brain cancer study
that you speak of. Um, if you saw their
diet, it was uh salmon, olive oil, a
little avocado, a little bit of
vegetable, but a lot of uh that was
pretty much what it was. It wasn't so
dramatically different that people
couldn't eat it. You could either easy
substitute the salmon with with a with a
ribeye, you know. Um, so all is to keep
your GKI. What's going to move your GKI
down in the zone, right? And if it's a
big ribeye, Yeah. Oh, wow. I could eat a
ribeye. Nobody. Oh, well, I'm a I'm a
vegan. Well, I don't know about the
vegans. they they have to work a little
harder to get into the GKI. Um, and they
and uh they have to take a lot of
supplements and other things where you
where uh a carnivore guy could probably
get more. It's it's easier to do. But I
I don't push carnivore, vegan, I don't
care what pizza pie you get a GKI that's
low enough, uh you you'll be in a better
zone. And whatever that person needs to
do to get into that zone, uh my hats off
to them. So
>> you know and uh so we don't we don't pro
profess any kind of a particular diet.
All we know is that eating plants alone
is more difficult to lower your GKI.
>> Uh so and and and if people don't
believe me then they go out and see what
their GK if some guy wants to say show
me a GKI of 0.6
you know eating broccoli all day long
then then then I'll say wow I I'm I'm
I'm educated now. But so far we haven't
seen that.
>> How much variability are we discovering
among people's metabolic uh processing?
So because conventional wisdom says that
if you want to have this relatively good
glucose to ketone ratio, you're probably
going to have to eat animal products
because they're the ones that have the
fewest carbohydrates. Are there people
that just have radically different
metabolic strategies where they're able
to keep their blood glucose down eating
things that are starchier or are we
finding as we collect more data that
this is actually a a decent model for
like all humans?
>> Yeah. Well, I I don't know uh because
all this is quite new
>> and we don't have um epidemiological
studies on glucose uh GKI values uh like
vegans and guys that eat only fish, guys
that eat only only beef. Um you know,
what does it do? Uh I I think that's all
the future because right now we don't we
we we don't have the availability of the
technology. Uh you know that we have the
precision extra meter from Abbott or you
have the keto mojo meter. we don't we're
developing the free libras you know then
everybody will be able to collect the
data on themselves and see if we do in
fact have groups of folks uh that fall
into different categories uh with
respect to what they eat and what it
what effect it has on their on their GKI
and people will naturally want to
experiment on themselves to see the
ranges of what they are or un are or or
are not able to eat and that's all going
to be very exciting. Um but you know um
we are a obsessive compulsive species as
well. Everybody wants to go out and
better the other guy who can get the
lowest GKI you know. Um that's true and
uh um and they're going to like you know
so we we have to be cautious that we
don't overdo it uh in a lot of ways and
but I think it's going to be an exciting
opportunity for the future to integrate
what you guys are saying uh but also
linking it to um uh prevention and
management of cancer as well as chronic
diseases because now we have tools that
we can do so it's not so mysterious you
know this oh eat this and you're going
to get that eat that don't eat this,
don't eat that. What the hell? Just do
your GKI. You'll know what you can and
cannot.
>> So, are there any downsides to this kind
of diet in general?
>> Exactly what I was going to ask.
>> Well, well, I mean, uh, I would say that
we as a species evolved to be in
ketosis. So, that's who we are for
hundreds of thousands of years. We were
in a ketoic state. We had a lot of
exercise. Uh, we didn't have any highly
carb processed carbohydrates in our
diet. You can only get it's hard to get
obese eating buffalo meat all day long,
you know. Um it's it's uh eating elk,
eating elephant, okay? Um woolly
mammoths. How many how much how could
fat could you get by eating woolly
mammoth bone marrow all day long? There
there's a and we also have a hormone in
our body called choleiccytokinine.
It's an appetite suppressant hormone
that affects the 10th cranial nerve and
it controls appetite. So when you eat a
lot of protein and fat you upregulate
choleiccytokinine and you you don't feel
hungry anymore. So interestingly enough
when you eat highly car high
carbohydrates you kind of reduce
choleiccytokinine activity and you feel
hungry all the time. So um uh yo-yo
dieting and all this kind of crazy
stuff. And then again you you know you
definitely lose weight with exercise and
eating in ketosis. There's no question
about it. you get this is because we
didn't see obese paleolithic man was not
definitely not obese and then when we
look at modern people today those folks
that live according to traditional ways
almost invariably they have very little
cancer they're lean very fit looking
kinds of people um they may have
parasites and and and other kinds of
conditions um but they're they're not
obese and generally they don't suffer
from chronic uh chronic diseases so you
have to put all that uh perspective, but
it's going to be exciting to see once
this becomes more um available and
streamlined how people are going to have
these GKI contests, you know, who can
and then there's the other the other
group who can get the highest GKI.
>> So, uh right, not that anybody would
want that. Who the hell would want to
eat like uh 100 hot dogs in 10 minutes?
I mean, people but yet Joey Chestnut's
out there doing this kind of stuff. So,
so, um, so people say, "Oh, let me see
if I can eat 12 pizzas and wash it down
with a gallon of sweet tea to see if I
can jack up my GKI." I I think the
highest one we've seen was in a diabetic
person, maybe one uh 1,000 something in
GKI, [laughter] but but it's usually
associated with some metabolic imbalance
of some sort. So, um, but you know, you
got nuts like this. I mean, let's be
honest, we're not a logical species in
any way.
No, we are not. Um, I wanted to ask you
about the exercise component of this.
So, we have that uh the ketosis, we have
metabolic therapy by the application of
something that interrupts glutamine
metabolism. How much exercise do you
need? Are these people running like a
marathon a day? Is it enough to take a
walk? Like what are we talking about?
>> Yeah. Well, uh we we know that um
glutamine uh builds muscles. So if you
exercise the glutamine in the blood uh
to some extent will be reduced. Um we
also know that when muscles are
contracted in aerorobic exercise they
take the glucose out of the bloodstream.
Uh muscle does not share its glucose
with any other organ. This is another
aspect of evolutionary biology. Uh liver
will share because it turns the the the
the glucose it it it can produce
gluconneogenesis from other sources.
Once once the stored glycogen is used
up, it will take some amino acids and
things to produce produce glucose at a
very low level. Um because
ariththraittes, you got to have the
ariththraittes, they always need some
small level of of glucose. But exercise,
okay, so why as evolutionary biology?
Because we have to think back uh we were
under threat from being killed by
another member of our species or eaten
by some some animal. uh if if you didn't
have any energy to run away or defend
yourself, you would have been
victimized. So, uh we need the energy
and our muscles, we have to run and
fight and the muscles have the energy to
to do that. So, the muscle isn't going
to share, oh, my brain needs some sugar.
Let's give all the the glycogen for my
muscles to the brain and when the tiger
comes, you're you're his meal. That's
evolutionary biology. But, um uh so, but
exercising will pull glucose out of the
bloodstream. And if you're already in a
uh ketoic state, uh you can you can
enhance this a little bit more. Also,
appetite uh you're not thinking about
food when you're when you're walk. Now,
I'm not saying what kind of exercise,
you know, it could be aerobic walking if
you're young. You could be running uh
you could be lifting weights. There's a
bunch swimming, biking, doesn't make any
difference. As long as the muscles are
active, they're going to be pulling
glucose out of the bloodstream. So if
you have cancer and you're on a low
carbohydrate diet and you're exercising
and you're taking fenendazol or
embendol, man, you're going to put a
world of hurt on these damn tumor cells.
And then you elevate your ketones, which
the normal cells in the brain can use
and the muscles and the heart, but not
to the tumor cell. Tumor cells can't use
that because they have a poor
mitochondria. You need a good
mitochondria to ma manage fatty acids
and ketone bodies. So, and we
interrogated all we did all these
experiments in the lab, so we know
pretty much what's going to happen. Do
you have a feeling that a lot of the the
lack of response is due to there being a
long history of charlatan
propositions for how to cure cancer?
Like famously Steve Jobs died of
pancreatic cancer because instead of
getting chemotherapy, he followed the
advice of somebody who I think put him
on like a fruit juice diet.
>> Yeah. Well, see, um, we now know, he
didn't know at that time, nor did I. I
[clears throat] didn't know what was I
mean other than the glucose. We weren't
really clear about the glutamine. Uh we
we we we came Warberg himself didn't
know about that. Um so uh and I have no
idea what that um diet that Steve Jobs
took did to his glucose ketone index. He
never measured. We didn't have it then.
So um we can only speculate about what's
what happened. I don't know.
>> Well, and I'm not specifically asking
about jobs. I'm asking more about the
sense that I feel like people are really
attached to this idea that the standard
of care of uh radiation of uh
chemotherapy of these really aggressive
treatments is the only thing that can
help and there's a a vibe when you talk
to people where you're like hey have you
considered that there's other
possibilities like Charlotte says like
we talk to people who we have friends
that have cancer and we're like you got
like I have friend who's an
ultramarathon runner. And this is a
grown ass man who keeps a bag of gummy
bears in his car.
>> Yeah.
>> Because that's just what he's used to
from ultra endurance running where
everybody's just eating sugar snacks all
day long. And he's basically like, well,
the standard of care is is chemo and rad
and radiation.
>> Yeah. Well, we got 1,700 people a day
dying. uh um and and it's getting it
gets goes up every year and more and
more diagnosis we're see I'm seeing a
lot of young people now coming to me uh
young you know late 20s and mid-30s
early 40s what the hell is going on
>> um so clearly we have an obesity
epidemic let's be honest um if people
people if people knew that obesity is
replacing smoking as a major risk factor
uh but they don't know that so there's a
lack of massive lack of knowledge I
on on the part of the scientists
>> who think cancer is a genetic disease
and they're constantly uh hunting for
gene mutations that might be responsible
for your disregulated cell growth.
There's there's a pharmaceutical
industry making billions and billions of
dollars coming out with uh
imunotherapies or some other kind of
therapy uh dependent in large part on
the somatic mutation theory which has
now been undermined discredited
massively. Uh and then you have the
hospital industry uh which which
generates tremendous revenue for
radiation and chemo and this other
stuff. And then you have the federal
government that says cancer is a genetic
disease uh awarding research grants to
investigators at top medical schools and
science centers uh looking for mutations
and genes that might be responsible for
your disregulated cell growth. So you
have miss and disinformation at every
level in the cancer industry. And
>> can can we be clear though like there
are genetic changes associated with
cancer. You're just saying that they're
downstream of the metabolic issues. Is
that correct?
>> There's two issues. There's one sematic
mutations which is called the sematic
mutation theory. This is where mutations
of lifestyle or living cause uh nuclear
gene mutations. Then there's germline
mutations and you hear about the BA one
with Angelina Jolie. She's made that
kind of famous having her breasts and
ovaries removed or something like this.
And then you have the leaf ramen many
the lynch syndrome. These are germline
mutations. And we have a paper just
ready to submit uh with my colleague
Robert Bob Kaplan uh where we went
through every major syndrome inherited
germline syndrome and every one of those
inherited mutations disrupts oxidative
phosphorilation in the mitochondria. So,
and and and none of them are 100%
penetrate, meaning that a person could
have the mutation. Like Bracka 1, it's
like um 60% penetrate, meaning 40% of
the women that would have that mutation
never develop cancer. They only develop
cancer if the mutation disrupts
oxidative phosphorilation leading to
substrate level phosphorilation and
disregulated cell growth. So, there's
secondary risk factors. The primary risk
factor for all cancer, all major cancers
is insufficient oxidative
phosphorilation coupled to a
compensatory substrate level
phosphorilation leading to disregulated
cell growth. Not that complicated. So,
but for a lot of people, it's
overwhelmingly complicated. It's less
complicated than people made it out to
be. So you just have to know what the
the the the inherited risk factor is no
different than if when we're exposed to
a chemical carcinogen or ankcoenic virus
hepatitis C papilloma viruses. I showed
how those viruses are linked to
disregulated cell growth through an
effect on oxidative phosphorilation. So
the virus or the product of the virus
goes to the mitochondria disrupts
efficient oxidative phosphorilation
leading to chronic upregulation of
substrate level phosphorilation and
disregulated cell growth driven by
fermentation glucose and glutamine.
Every major cancer doing the same damn
thing. So it's one disease. It's not a
hundred different diseases. It's a it's
the the common pathophysiological
mechanism is insufficient oxidative
phosphorilation coupled to increased
substrate level phosphorilation
facilitated by ankco genes if1 alpha
mick open the floodgates to get glucose
and glutamine into the cell. So those
ankco genes are just facilitators of
driving the substrate level
phosphorilation. We have that p that's
going to come out in our big paper. So
all of this is is there uh we publish it
open access. Everybody's welcome to read
it. Uh uh if they they then they choose
to ignore it. So I you can't do anything
about that.
>> Have you heard of Stephanie Sen's work?
>> I I've heard of her. Yes. I I I've I've
heard some part I'm not intimately
familiar with with that. I think she's
down at MIT or something.
>> Yeah. And she's been doing a lot of
really interesting work on the effect of
glyphosates on disrupting metabolic
function where her
uh mechanism is that glyphosate
interrupts the dehydrogenases that are
important for processing the
intermediates for the mitochondria. And
so when the enzymes that are packaging
basically the carbon compounds that a
mic that the mitochondria needs to
function are broken down, you get all of
these downstream effects.
>> Yeah. Well, I think that could possibly
be certainly linked to the ankcogenic
paradox. So, um it would fall into that
into that line. Uh again you know um the
origin can be one person could get
breast cancer from a different reason
from another person from another person
but but the bottom line is there all the
all the cells are fermenting a and
regardless of what particular mechanism
was responsible for the interruption
chronic disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation you're dealing with a
population of cells that are fermenting.
So now you have to now you have to deal
with that uh which is then then goes
into the management section. So we can
try to avoid cancer by by uh avoiding
the the provocative agents that would
lead but once you have lead to dis
disruption of oxos but once you have
cancer now you have to deal with the the
fuels that are driving it.
>> Yeah I was going to ask just about the
different mechanisms of injury to the
oxidative phosphorilation system like
what are the different ways that that
can get disturbed? Well, when you look
at carcinogens, they call these
molecules carcinogens and and because
they cause cancer. And the question is,
oh yeah, I see a lot of DNA mutations
when I look at a tumor that was caused
by a carcinogen. But the origin of how
that disregulated cell growth came in
the first place. If you look at there
was a beautiful study, I have it in my
book where they looked at these
carcinogen exposed cells and they're
biolumin they're fluorescent. the the uh
the inside the mitochondria like
glittering uh which is from the reactive
oxygen species and that's and that's
where the mutations largely come from.
uh when oxidative phosphorilation is not
efficient. ROS reactive oxygen species
are the product of disregulated
oxidative phosphorilation and these
these ros are carcinogenic and
mutagenic. They further damage the
lipids and the proteins of the
mitochondria and they cause uh nuclear
genetic instability and other kinds of
mutations as you see as downstream
effects. So so um uh
>> and repair is really costly as well,
right? the enzymes that have to come in
and fix these things need a solid source
of ATP.
>> Yeah. And [clears throat] and uh so so
and and the cancer cell seems to be
buffered by from the ROSS because the
maj a a major uh um reducer of reactive
oxygen species is the glutathione
system. And the glutathione system in
the in the is part of the phosphate the
the PP the pentos phosphate pathway
producing a large amount of of NADPH
that drives the this what we call
antioxidant system antioxidant system
and the carbons from glucose and the
amino acid glutamate are part of the
glutathione system. So the two it's
unbelievable. So the two the two fuels
that are driving the disregulated growth
also protect the tumor cell from its own
dam from the the damage of the ROS but
the nucleus of the cell is being
damaged. So you're collecting DNA
mutations as a downstream effect of
oxidative phosphorilation and people are
all focusing on the downstream effects
rather than the original uh the the the
fuel that's driving the beast. So, so um
uh so once we know that we know how to
we know how to put out the fire, we know
how to uh slowly degrade or interrupt
the two fuels driving the disregulated
growth and keeping the rest of the body
healthy. So when you burn normal cells
are burning ketone bodies, we produce
much fewer ROSS and the and the
bioenergetic mechanism of that was
worked out but with my late friend
Richard Vich from the NIH uh where uh
ketone bodies do not produce FADH2 they
produce only NADH delivering electrons
to complex one and keeping the co-enzyme
Q in a fully oxidized state there
because that's where the Ross are coming
from from the half reduced form. uh and
and when you when you start throwing
more and more uh Ross out, you have a
tendency to degrade the efficiency of
your energetic system. So burning ketone
bodies is a way to protect the the
integrity of your mitochondria,
maintaining a highly efficient energy
state. Uh keeping you from not only
cancer but numerous other chronic
diseases and also life. Uh you live
longer when you keep the rost
restricted. So it's aging, anti-aging,
anti-cancer, anti-chronic disease. But
nobody wants to do it.
>> I mean, it's a
>> I'd rather eat, right? This is But
[laughter] this is as long as you know
that. See, when you're completely
unnowledgeable, then none you would
never know what I'm telling you. But now
you actually know and have a mechanism
that can explain it. Now it's your
choice to say whether I want to engage
or not engage in these activities.
>> Do you think that there's cancers that
this doesn't apply to?
>> Haven't found one yet. So um and our
papers show all major. So when I
published these cancers uh data on the
damage to mitochondria, lipid drop
accumulation, these are all biomarkers
of disregulated cell grow. These are all
biomarkers of inefficient oxidative
phosphorilation. Uh 98%
of of all cancers fall into this. Is
there a cancer out there that can grow
out of control with normal oxidative
phosphorilation and not dependent on
substrate level phosphorilation? I've
offered a $100 to my students for the
last five years. A crisp $100 bill. Um,
I'll give it to you. You find a You find
a tumor that can grow in a disregulated
way without a dependency on substrate
level phosphorilation, I'll give you the
hundred bucks. No problem.
>> Throw a Twinkie in and they might be
able to do it.
>> No, they ain't going to do it with a
Twinkie. So, uh, so uh, uh, because a
Twinkie is loaded with sugar. You got to
do it with with a cancer cell that's
respiring without oxid without
fermentation and growing growing out of
a dis. Now interesting thing is liver
liver regeneration can grow as fa the
regenerating liver cells can grow just
as fast as as tumor cells. So you have a
hepatoma which is a liver cancer. Okay
that will permeate your whole liver and
kill you. Well if you take a lobe off
your liver the liver naturally
regenerates very rapidly. Um, and they
are using glucose and glutamine in very
low quantities, but they're respiring
those two fuels. They're not fermenting
those two fuels. So, it's very
interesting to see that. And the liver
knows when to stop. Liver regeneration
knows. It just doesn't keep developing
more and more new loes of liver for
yourself. They know when to stop, but
the hepatoma does not know when to stop
and ends up killing you.
>> Hey, who else is working on this? Are
you completely alone? You mentioned your
colleague Robert. I couldn't remember
his last name.
>> Yeah. Well, uh, Bob Kaplan. He's just an
associate with us. He's he's doing the
the the the he's working very hard on
this. But Christoopoulos in Siml Weiss
University, the world leader on
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. When you don't know
certain things, you reach out to those
individuals that are the experts in
those areas. You then introduce them to
the problem. They start looking at it
with their level of expertise and then
you bring yourself the the groups
together to do this. We have a lot of
physicians that are joining who are
reading about what we're doing because
they're into the issue of patient care.
So they want to they want to use
ketogenic metabolic therapy to look at
the outcome of their patients. But these
are in small clinics and isolated
conditions. They're not at the top
medical schools, the top uh cancer
research centers. They're not these guys
are all locked into the sematic mutation
theory in lock step with whatever the
NIH says. So whatever the NIH says,
whatever the standard of care says,
they're in lock step with that. uh and
they're not willing or capable or even
uh desirable to change their their way
of doing things.
>> How do you get grant funding if you
can't rely on those traditional
structures?
>> All all of our funding comes from
philanthropy and private foundations. So
>> folks make the donations to the
university Boston College saying I want
to support seafood's research. So we we
get we get donations directly because I
cannot accept a nickel from anybody. It
has to come through legitimate uh
channels. The university has a channel
here and then we have private
foundations. Travis Kristofferson's
foundation for cancer metabolic
therapies and then private foundations
will are reaching out slowly to us
because why should you dump in thousands
and thousands potentially millions of
dollars into these programs that haven't
done anything? There's no
accountability. Where the hell does all
the money go? Susan Coleman breast
cancer found people running and swimming
and jumping and climbing and all we do
is get more dead people. Uh there
doesn't seem and then when you look at
the when you look at what they're doing
that they're hunting for genes and you
say now I know why you get all these
dead people. The only people getting
healthy are the ones running and jumping
and whatever the foundation is, you
know, but the poor people are getting
brutalized. So 1,700 people a day and
you can raise money for the lung cancer
foundation, the breast cancer, the brain
cancer, and then you do standard of care
and get brutalized. So um uh it's it's
and they feel good raising money for a
for a a failed operation. So
>> now that you mentioned standard of care,
I remembered I was going to ask you, is
it possible to run a trial of your
protocol without also having to give
somebody radiation or chemo? Uh well
that's what our hope is but we were
slapped down at Cedar Sinai they
wouldn't do it uh because Jethrou is
working with us and he said they will oh
they'll do metabolic keto only after you
do standard of care. Well standard of
care is only put you on the on on the
slope to death. So now you're going to
try to take and not only keep a guy
alive but try to correct all the damage
that radiation and poisoning did to the
body. This makes no sense. Why don't you
start with metabolic therapy and then if
that doesn't do a real good job, you
might want to consider a little
teemolamide or or something like that
rather than poison and irdiating the guy
up front. Why don't you consider that as
a secondary option after you oh the
tumor shrunk? I don't know what
happened. Yeah. You now you want to
irdiate this poor guy when you the tumor
is shrinking and the surgeon can say I
think I can get it all out. I mean
everything is backass forward. So so um
uh and it takes knowledge. People have
to become familiar with what I'm saying
and we're publishing this. It's not like
I'm telling you this. Go and read the
papers over and over again. Open access
papers. We got them out there. People
can read make
>> you said you said you have a book out
also.
>> Yeah. Well, my book is cancer as a
metabolic disease. I wrote that book in
2012. Uh can cancer uh cancer as a
metabolic disease. Um I speculated on
some things. I had an idea uh about
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation as being the second arm
of the fermentation uh pathway but then
I got Christoopols to work with me to
prove it and uh and that paper came out
in in asin neuro for brain glyo
glyobblasto
uh but now we're starting to see it for
all these different cancers so it's just
a matter of time I don't know how long
it's going to take but but we're not
going anywhere uh as long as
philanthropy and private foundation
support us. We're going to pound down
this research to choke on it. So, you
you have no choice but to to accept it,
you know.
>> Do you do you think that do you aim for
publishing in a place like uh Nature or
Science or Cell or are you more
preoccupied with just getting the work
out there?
>> Well, I publish in in in peer-reviewed
good journals. Uh Cell and Science today
h have become overly uh u involved with
minutia. Uh they love to have supplement
after supplement after supplement. Oh,
you didn't do this. You didn't do that.
You
>> figures one through.
>> People living twice as long then, huh?
Yeah.
>> Figures 1 through 14 with panels A
through J for bigger.
>> The little tiny western plots and gene
expression, beehive plots, waterfall
plots, you know, all these kinds of
volcano plots. Oh, that must be really
important. You know, deep uh and the we
got 1,700 people a day dying. you're
wasting your time on this kind of
you know. Uh let's let me
show. And then we got the Greek study.
Oh, I can't believe that we had this
tremendous success. Oh, there must be
something wrong with that study.
[laughter]
>> Yeah. Well, I guess the reason that I
ask is because I'm like I know that
people in the field respond to things
that are published in these big
journals, right? Like we know
physicians, we know surgeons, and
they're like, "Oh, it wasn't in nature.
>> Is it is it really that reputable?" And
so like I wonder do you use that as a
strategy where you have some you know uh
art of war level plan for getting in?
>> Yeah. No, that's a very good point. But
you know my my friend Greg Glassman, the
former owner of CrossFit, he he runs the
the broken science initiative. We we
found that half the stuff in science and
nature can't be reproduced.
>> This is one of the great problems.
Nobody can reproduce that crap. Nobody
has a enough time to look at. First
thing you say is the study in science
and nature in cancer based on the
sematic mutation theory or the
mitochondrial metabolic theory. Let's
look at it that way right off the bat.
If it's in the sematic mutation theory,
get rid of it. It's not going to have
any relevance to the to the clinic
anyway. So then you start looking at the
overall outcome in pre-clinical systems.
How long did you keep your subjects
alive? Were they were they sing
orthotopic models? Meaning the tumor
genetics and the host genetics are the
same. not in these genetically created
monstrosities that we're doing. So, so
you have to look at the systems under
which you're you're working. How
>> you're talking about xenograph tumors
where they grow the cancer cells
somewhere else and then they inject the
animals with them in order to
demonstrate that the tumor that they've
created can be treated with the drugs
that they're using.
>> Yeah. Well, the xenograph you're taking
a human cell and you're growing the
human cell in in a mouse that has a a
broken immune system uh that has type
two and type 1 diabetes. you got 50
million years of evolutionary difference
between the biology of the human cell
and the host mouse and then you get some
revelation. Whoa, look what happened.
Then you put it in the clinic and it
doesn't work. Um, those should be the
last models you look at. The the models
you should look at are all natural ones
where the tumors arose in that strain of
mouse uh and it's a natural arising. See
if you can manage those kinds of uh
tumors, not some of these genetically
engineered things. Yes, they're great
technological improvements for what I
don't know, but it's certainly not
dropping the death rate. You know, uh we
got 1,700. If they knew if you knew what
you were doing and you had a model that
was really powerful, we wouldn't have
1,700 people a day dying. So, that tells
you something's wrong with whatever
system, whatever program, whatever
you're doing ain't working. And we know
that metabolic therapy can drop that
death rate very, very significantly. And
we have the understanding of the
mechanisms responsible for that. But
it's just too it's too radical right
now. Too radical. So you got to wait for
the we got to wait for the field to
catch up with what you know.
>> I mean I have a lot of hope. There's
somebody else in Boston at Tufts. Uh
Michael Leven. Are you familiar with
that?
>> Yes, I know Michael. Yeah. Very cool.
Like I I think that the ideas that he's
putting forth, which is that perhaps
there's a higher abstraction level of
biology that is not at the level of pure
nucleotides inside the genome being
dysfunctional, but there being a
different approach. if he's successful
at what he's trying to do, which is
basically regenerative medicine, I think
that that might be the the push that's
necessary to get people to start
thinking about these questions at the
level that you're thinking about them,
which is one abstraction layer above
like what's happening to the genes. It's
like, well, there's this functional
feature of the cell that's broken and
that's causing everything downstream
because like you said earlier, you're
like, there's a million different
>> pathways to cancer if you're looking at
gene mutations and it seems like it's a
bunch of different disorders. Like I've
heard this in the introductory paragraph
of cancer papers, right?
>> Cancer is not a uniform disease. It's a
bunch of different things. the ideology
for each condition is different and in
the back of my mind I've always been
like that's really weird that seems like
it would be downstream of like a single
feature.
>> Yeah, you're right. So, but they all
every one of those things that has a
terribly different genet or completely
different very different genetic
background. They're all fermenttors. So,
that's the commonality of all things.
It's a the common pathophysiological
mechanism is what as I said the
replacement of oxfos with substrate
level phosphorilation regardless of what
the genetic profile tells us. Yeah. And
Mike Leven and I had discussions. As a
matter of fact, I I cited his work in my
in my 2015 paper on on metastasis
because metastatic cancer uh arises from
fusion hybridization of our immune cell
macroofage with a cancer stem cell and
and that has the capacity to spread
around your body and you don't need new
mutations for that. And I told Michael
that he knows that. So we know how what
metastic and those metastatic cancer
cells are glutamine driven. So they need
the glutamine. So we know how to manage
all the metastatic cancers. I mean,
>> can I just wait, that's really, really
profound. I want to make sure that
everybody heard that. So, you're saying
that essentially transformed immune
cells become the mode by which cancer
spreads throughout the body.
>> Yes. Published that. And and listen,
here's another thing. I published that
called the origin of metastatic cancer.
That's my most highly cited paper. 1,230
citations
>> uh that detailed what I the the uh
origin of metastatic cancer as part of
the immune system. Right. Wow. You think
that somebody would catch on to it? In
the beginning of the paper, I said
metasta met cancer metastasis is largely
responsible for cancer deaths. That's
all they read. So they cite the paper
because I I made that super stupid
little sentence and they never read the
damn paper. And then they go and tell us
how the epithelial misenimal transition
which is based on the sematic mutation
which is I call the werewolf hypothesis.
It's it's [laughter]
>> sorry
>> I have it in my book. It makes
>> funny sometimes man.
>> It makes so damn sense evolutionarily or
any other way you want to look at it.
Yet when you go to the ACR American
Association of Cancer Research meetings
row after row of people with the EMT
mente I said don't these people have any
functional brain cells? This doesn't
make any sense evolutionarily. So,
>> so how does that change the approach to
uh metastasis?
>> Well, now if if it's glutamine and
glucose dependent, you can kill
metastatic cancer. So, we we we came to
this revelation uh because I I had a a
model of brain cancer uh from EN was
called the VM. They form natural tumors
in the brain. And then I said it took me
10 my students and I over 10 years to
figure out what the metastatic cell was.
And it turned out to be a macrofasage.
And then we did a deep dive on uh all
that I I wrote a paper in that in that
uh review origin of metastatic cancer
where my student uh um Leanne Eisentrite
we went through all metastatic cancers
and saw that they manufacture markers of
macrofasages
um uh uh indicating that there was some
sort of fusion hybrid condition. And
Akquil in 1905 a German pathologist said
he thinks metastasis comes from some
sort of fusion hybrid. The late John
Pallick at Yale was jumping up and down
screaming and yelling about cancer being
some sort of fusion hybrid uh uh
condition. Melissa Wong from Oregon
Health Science Center has been been
saying this. A number of people have
been saying this uh that that that
there's the the cancer has
characteristics of of of immune cells,
right? So, and and um uh current Candace
Per, a very well powerful recognized uh
scientist said the same thing and she
was vilified um and and the attack she
published it in science saying that lung
cancer has is a macroof kind of a
disease and there were people that
attacked her and boy I tell she laid
into those guys like there was no
tomorrow. I give her a lot of credit.
She just tore the ass off some of these
idiots that were challenging her work.
She was the leader in the field and she
you didn't look at the data. She was so
it was great to see that happening. But
um but
>> there's a mechanism at play here. Well,
actually, first of all, you said Candace
Per.
>> Candace Per. Yes.
>> Okay. I'll look her up. But so the
mechanism here is
>> science 1984. Okay.
>> Look at the paper 1984 science with her
husband uh Ruff. So the mechanism is
that the white blood cells engulf a
cancer cell and then there's some kind
of transformation of their own
mitochondria that induces them to be
cancerous as they go throughout the body
or like what is this?
>> Well, well in in a in a in a cancerous
situation, uh you have a lot of
inflammation. Uh you have a lot of
necrosis. You have a lot of mess there.
And our immune system is designed to w
heal wounds. This is what we do. So if I
cut myself and lead a big contusion,
I've got hypoxia. I've got bacteria
there and then my monocytes come pouring
out of the bloodstream and differentiate
into macrofagages to facilitate wound
healing with fibroblast and also killing
uh bacteria that might be in there
because it's going to be a a race for
life or death. If the bacteria win, you
die from sepsis. You die from bacterial
infection. If your immune system wins,
you kill the bacteria, you heal the
wound, you got a scar, and you survive.
Cancer is like an unhealed wound. Cancer
is is growing, creating the same micro
environment as you would have in a
wound. The problem is the cells that are
creating the disturbed micro environment
are fermentors, but they can't
metastasize. They might be like some
stem cell thing. So, they grow, but
they're throwing out acidified lactic
acid and suinic acid, signaling the
immune system to come in. The immune
system comes in and throws out cytoines
and growth factors. thinking they're
facilitating wound healing, but it's
actually making the situation worse.
It's doing something evolutionarily
programmed in a wrong context. So, and
and it gets worse and worse. Now,
macroofagages have a unique capability.
They can fuse with each other to
facilitate wound healing or they can
fuse with other cells in the micro
environment. So if I have a bunch of
stem cells with already corrupted
oxidative phosphorilation and
mitochondria and are [clears throat]
fermenting and the and the macrofage
comes in and cytoplasmically fuses with
the cytoplasm of the stem cell. All of a
sudden you get you get a mixing and a
dilution of the mitochondria and the
macrofase. All of a sudden, now you have
a a a cell that can ferment, but now
it's disregulated because the organel
that's regulating that cell has now has
now become part of the part of the
problem. So you have you have the most
powerful cell in your body running
rogue. uh but it has the genetic
capability of suppressing normal immune
cells surviving in the circulation uh
called intravisation where they leave
the site enter the bloodstream go
through the bloodstream extravisate and
get into tissues spreading around the
the body all because they are programmed
to do this the problem the organel that
controls them doing in the right way is
now corrupted and they just and as long
as they have fermentable fuels they're
rogue macrofagages and that's the origin
of metastatic cancer I spent 10 years
doing this.
>> I think it's really surprising. I mean,
most people who have been through some
college biology or even high school
biology probably have heard of
macrofasages eating things like
consuming, you know, other cells,
bacteria, things like that. But I I
don't think that the fusion mechanism is
very widespread that people understand
that that the macroofasages will fuse
with
>> uh wounded tissue. I I I've never heard
that before. But I'm also struck by how
kind of dumb my understanding of
metastatic cancer was because I I'm
going to expose myself as being a total
idiot. I just figured they grew legs and
just kind of walked away.
>> No, they're they're they're part of our
immune system. Um uh uh yeah, and and
you can kill them uh because we know
what they eat. And that's why I said
first thing you do is Yeah, they're big.
That's why I call them macroofage, big
eater. Okay. So they eat stuff. So um
and that's another thing, too. when
they're starving, uh, they will eat each
other. That's why you really have to be,
um, and they'll eat the the the micro
environment stuff and they'll they'll
eat micro beans. We we tested all this
stuff, so we know I know what they are
and I know how to kill them. The problem
is I tell people that and they look at
me like, "Oh, I never heard of that
before." Well, for Christ's sake, you're
not doing the research like we are.
You're not reading the papers like we
are. There's plenty of information.
>> Are you hopeful that people will just
read your papers and attempt to
institute this in their own lives?
Well, that's a hope. Yeah. I mean,
obviously, if I didn't care about it, I
wouldn't have published any of I just
keep it to myself. So, I would know if I
got metastatic cancer, I know exactly
what to do, and I feel bad for everybody
else who doesn't know what I know. It's
not
>> I'm really excited to share this
conversation with people. There's a
bunch of people in my life that need to
hear this. And I'm so grateful we got to
finally sit down with you and and lay it
out. It's super super important. I've
had incredible changes in my own health
as a result of some dietary
modifications along this lines. Not
cancer related, but I I really do think
that we have a lot more power than just
going and getting some pills from the
doctor. And this is super super
inspiring to me.
>> It's wildly empowering.
>> Yeah. Right. The idea that I mean if a
death sentence is handed down to you by
a doctor, the idea that there are things
that you can do and
>> help your own body survive is just
magnificent.
>> And the thing you'd want is the person
that would would know uh uh this. So the
team is the patients knowledge and the
physician's knowledge together uh
working together as a team uh to work
with that individual which oh this
didn't work so well for you. Let's just
try that. But we're still putting
pressure in this direction there. So in
other words, you have two knowledgeable
individuals and the outcome will always
be significantly better than if either
of them don't know anything or one knows
and the other one doesn't. So you it's
you've got to have a team effort in
managing cancer. Uh but it also uh will
manage all these different chronic
diseases as well. And when you consider
the enormous reund how much money our
country and other countries are spending
on diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
high blood Alzheimer's disease, cancer,
uh where all of these can be managed
basically uh with the knowledge of of
keeping your GKI low and bring bringing
your body back into some sort of a
Neolithic period and recognizing those
products of our great technology that
can be greatly enjoyed uh uh uh uh under
certain conditions. So, it's going to be
a lot of knowledge because we have to
we're going to evolve who who we are
today if we live um uh may not be who we
are in a million years from now. Uh
we're going to know a lot of things that
are called mysteries and unknown will
become known if we can survive as a
species. But but knowing facts and and
replicating facts uh are the basis for
the development of theories. So once you
have a significant observations that are
repeated over and over again, you
develop a theory to explain that
phenomenon. And as you begin to develop
theories to explain the phenomenon, we
move forward in in in what we can do.
And this was the same thing with the
heliocentric geocentric theory. It was
the capernician revolution that said it
was the sun, not the earth. So you could
explain the movement of the planets. You
could explain things. you can better
understand the universe based on these
kinds of things. And this is the same
thing. Once you understand the biology
of cancer and you put the the pieces
together, you can move forward with
disease management and understanding
ourselves better. So this is the future.
Uh it's just that right now you have a
lot of obstacles that need to be knocked
down in order to move the field forward.
But it's going it's coming.
>> I mean it's the same in it's the same in
all disciplines. Like Shil and I the
purpose of this podcast is to work on
lowering those barriers. And so we've
actually uh in addition to the podcast,
we've started organizing uh conferences.
And so this year we're doing one for
astrophysics and cosmology where we're
bringing together, you know, the
orthodox thinkers, the philosophers, the
the observers that are looking through
telescopes. And we're calling it beyond
the big bang. And so they're going to
publish the scientists are going to
collaborate to publish like a road map
for cosmology in the aftermath of the
conference. And so it's really I just I
think the future is creating a new
scientific society where people actually
have the ability to explore these sorts
of topics from a position that is not
ideologically or financially captured.
>> Yeah. Well well this is the uh advance
um of science. This is the way this is
the new the new revelations
um that you see these paradigm changes.
This is this is the way the way it works
for sure. So, um anyway, uh I'll let you
guys go. Um I have a a meeting that I
have to get to, but um you know, get
yourself a a Keto Mojo. Um start
measuring your GKI and finding out what
what zone you guys are in. So, uh when
you go to a cocktail party, it now
becomes a point of discussion. Oh, how's
your GKI today? [laughter]
>> Oh, no. Oh, no.
>> We already have hard enough time at
cocktail parties.
Well, whatever party you go to, go
[laughter]
whatever group you go to. But yeah, it's
it's going to be a transformation, which
is exciting. You know, whenever you have
a new generalization, it it it it makes
people think about things they they
previously didn't think about.
>> It's a hell of a time to be alive.
>> Yeah. All right. Well, thank you so
much. We salute your efforts uh to the
highest degree and we are super excited
about this work
>> and let let people know that uh if they
want to support our research they can
support it at Boston College because we
depend on those folks uh the
philanthropists
uh the people who say I don't really
care if I make a buck on this I just
want to be part of the movement um and
it's going to be exciting. So uh uh or
Travis Christopherson's foundation uh
these kinds of things because that he
that's how we keep going. So now after
after I have to go to this meeting what
I do is I have these same conversations
with my my group next door and we talk
about these things for hours and hours
and hours always looking for a fatal
flaw in our concepts and trying to
identify any blind side that we might
get from some piece of evidence that
might be contradictory to what we think
and then we evaluate it and we do
experiments to test it. So that's the
way we
>> I love it.
>> Good luck out there. Thank you so much.
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> Okay, guys. Have a nice day now. You
too. Bye, everybody.